To change directory permisions in linux use the following
chmod+rwx to add permissions
chmod-rwx directoryname to remove permission


permission in linux:3 3 3

a)3 types of permissions
b)always displayed in set of 3 (rwx)
c)3 different categories of people.ie;permission for user,group and everybody else


1.read:someone who can only read or view the contents of a file or directory cannot make any changes ,eg:r-- meaning only read first
 dash-no writing,second dash -no execute

2.write:you can and save and update but cannot run or execute

3.execute : you can execute something like a script

you can have more than one permission at a time.
eg:rw- meaning:read, write, no execute
eg:r-x meaning:read, no write ,execute

in windows we have administrator,in linux its superuser called root-can do anything you want.

read - 4
write - 2
execute - 1

two paths : absolute and relative path

cd / :take you to the root directory : - /
pwd :to confirm you are in your root directory
ls -l :displays everything in root directory
home directory : cd home
to go to soumya folder : cd s then hit tab key ,linux completes the word for you ,enter and type pwd 
to take you one level up : cd ..
to "        two  "     " : cd ../..

copy command : cp ,copy keeps the original copy and creates a brand new file
remove : rm 
move : rename: mv ,move the original file and its contents to a diff name

to create a directory : mkdir directory name eg:mkdir test
to remove a directory use -r flag eg:rm -r test 1 where test 1 is the directory 

top command:
it shows memory uses,cpu 
ie;it shows how your system or server is doing

More top commands avaialable in www.binarytides.com/linux-top-command/
to exit from top commnd : cnrtl c

PROCESS COMMAND:ps : lists all process in the linux server.
A running task or activity or a process or a script creates a process.

VI EDITOR:
inbuilt editor in linux,lets you create or edit files.its strictly command line editor.
only works with keyboard not mouse,.



GREP COMMAND:is used to search for a string or a word inside a file ,search for a string inside a result.,not a file name
"|" used to combine 2 commands. eg: ps -ef | grep root (grep means search root)
that doesnt mean it will display results from 2 commands,it will execute the first command and the result is used as the input for the 
second command to run the second command.

for eg:to search a word "demo" in a file marketing.txt
 (hello this is a demo class,
  hope this demo helps )
grep -i demo marketing.txt

grep can be used once at a time
:wq to save the file
 

WC COMMAND:word count

-i :removes case sensitivity

netstat :tells you all the port numbers are being used 
eg:if you are asked to find the port number 8080 netstat -an | grep 8080
Default port number :7001

tail command:shows you last couple of commands
eg :to show the last 10 lines,  tail -10 file name

head command :top couple of lines
 
to go to a specific row ,make sure you are not in insert mode,type line no (for eg 21),then shift g.







